# Katie Bouman Biography

“So, in the movie ‘Interstellar’, we get an up-close look at a super massive blackhole. Set against a backdrop of bright gas, the black hole’s massive gravitational pull bends light into a ring. However, this is not a real image“. The young PhD student in computer science and AI at MIT, Dr. Katie Bouman introduces us to her TED talk[1] back in November 2016. Almost 4 years ago now (as of October/November 2020), Bouman set out to revolutionise our understanding of one of the biggest mysteries of our time, black holes. She led the creation of an image processing algorithm which would hopefully produce the first ever image of a black hole. On April 10, 2019 humanity was given its first ever glimpse of a real black hole, which was previously thought as unseeable, due to the incredible work of Dr. Bouman and her team of 200 other scientists.

One may ask “Why pick Dr. Katie Bouman to write a biography about?”. Funnily enough my inspiration for this biography came from Instagram, when I saw a picture of Margaret Hamilton standing beside her code that she wrote for the Apollo project, this was contrasted with a picture of Bouman standing next to the hard drives containing the data to be processed for the image. Later that day in a Software Engineering lecture, we talked about what we could learn from Margaret Hamilton as software engineers. From this, I knew that I wanted to learn more about Bouman. I found this image profoundly interesting as it showed one legend of the software industry side by side with another. Who will be unequivocally represented in history, similar to the likes of Ada Lovelace. I also found it inspirational how she used her passions, image processing and astrophysics, despite only having a formal education in image processing. Nevertheless, she harnessed her two passions to help us understand more about the universe. As I mentioned above, we had thought of blackholes as unseeable and were referencing indirect evidence of their existence. Bouman however, used her knowledge to prove to us the existence of black holes.

Bouman grew up in Indiana and got her love for computers and engineering from her father Charles Bouman, who is a professor of electrical and computer engineering. Katie however, began her passion for imaging in 2007 as a high school student, where she first heard about the Event Horizon Telescope in school, which I will talk more about in the following paragraph. She studied electrical engineering at the University of Michigan and earned her master’s degree in 2013 and doctoral degree in 2017 from MIT. Her master’s thesis, Estimating Material Properties of Fabric through the Observation of Motion, was awarded the best master’s thesis in electrical engineering. After earning her masters, she joined Harvard’s Event Horizon Telescope Imaging team in 2013[2].

Bouman led the development of the Continuous High-Resolution Image Reconstruction using Patch Priors (CHIRP) algorithm, with the help of the Event Horizon Telescope, she would hopefully produce an image of a black hole. But not just any black hole, they wanted a picture of the Messier 87 which is at the centre of our neighbouring local cluster[a], the Virgo Cluster, 55-million light years away[3]. If a black hole is theoretically impossible to see, how can we capture it in a single image? To the human eye a black hole is technically impossible to see. But luckily for us, a telescope is capable of far more than a human eye. Telescopes work by taking radio waves of light beyond the scope of the human eye's ability and can produce a computer image of rings of light caused by the gravitational pull of the black hole, which would result in an image of hot plasma zipping around it. But if the black hole is 55-million light years away how can we see it? A problem Bouman and her team faced was “At this distance this blackhole is the same size as an orange on the moon”. There was one easy solution to this, Bouman and her team calculated the size of the telescope needed to depict this black hole that is so far away. The resulting telescope ended up being the size of the earth and obviously this is not a feasible option. The team needed another option that could be considered unconventional. This is where the Event Horizon Telescope comes to play. We already have an object the size of the earth, being the planet we live on.  We also already have multiple space observatories around the world. So why don’t we create an algorithm that would piece together the different data-points taken by each telescope and thus creating a somewhat virtual earth sized telescope. A normal telescope works by reflecting light off mirrors into a sensor and then changing their angle repeatedly. This gives us data-points of where the objects in space are and then the rest is filled in algorithmically. Basically a game of connect the dots, but for a computer. Because this particular method can give many different results, Bouman was tasked with writing CHIRP, an algorithm to get the most reasonable image of this essentially unlimited result set. If the team could get a reasonable image of the black hole, they could then calculate the size and prove Einstein’s theory of General Relativity.

But how would CHIRP find the most realistic image of an infinite set of possibilities? This was done by the algorithm ranking results by how likely they are to be true. Another problem faced by Bouman, was that we have never seen a black hole, so how can the algorithm predict what is likely and what is not and what if General Relativity didn’t hold? “We would still want an accurate image”, Bouman stated in her TED talk[1] “We want to leave the option open to see a giant elephant in the middle of our galaxy”. Different images have different features. AI can now tell the difference between an image of a dog and a cat, so why can’t it tell the difference between a simulated image of a black hole and a dog? Well it turns out it actually can but Bouman had to first train the algorithm to what images look like without imposing a bias to a certain type of image. This was done in three steps. First, by training the algorithm on simple images that were alike so there was no bias I.E. all were everyday images. Secondly, using many pre-existing images, breaking down these pieces and letting the algorithm reconstruct all these into one image. Lastly, Bouman fed image sets of simulated images of blackholes, real astronomical images and everyday images and repeated the steps above. Then when she executed it on the dataset containing the “image” of the black hole what would happen? It turned out that despite the three results being trained on different image types they all produced a similar image and thus a realistic image of the black hole.

How can the existence of black holes affect society today? Previously, we only had indirect evidence of these unseeable mysterious black holes but the hard evidence of their existence proved Einstein’s theory of General Relativity, which doesn’t end the idea of space time but rather expands on it, setting new rules and new boundaries. We may learn a lot more about the universe we live in with this discovery and may use it now to find new black holes that might even threaten our existence. This may accelerate the idea of space travel and inhabiting new planets soon in hopes to avoid our extinction. While it is highly unlikely that a black hole will swallow us up in the next generation or even the next 50 generations, if not the next 100 million years. It is uncertain to say when a blackhole will absorb up the entire universe, But following the Expanding Universe theory and the future of the expanding universe[4] it is estimated that in 1040 (10 duodecillion) to the next 10100 (10 googol) years the entire universe will be dominated by supermassive blackholes bigger than any we have even thought of today. Does this mean we will eventually be absorbed by a black hole? We don’t know. Some people argue that it will never happen as we will never get close enough to a black hole, while others argue that a black hole the sheer size of Messier 87 could swallow our entire solar system if altered the gravitational forces emitted from the sun. While it is uncertain to say there is a definite end to the universe with the existence black holes it is certainly a mere possibility in my opinion.

I think software engineers can learn a lot from the work of Dr. Katie Bouman. Her work is an extraordinary example of how it is good to think differently when faced with a problem, whether that problem is we don’t even know if black holes exist, if Einstein’s General Relativity is accurate or even if the solution to the problem is to build a telescope the size of earth. She proved to us that we can improvise by thinking outside the box and using the resources we have today to prove amazing things even if the data produced would be in the petabytes and take months to process. While we may not have the resources to prove something now there is more than likely another way. We can also learn that working together in a team that consists of many different specialties rather than a team full of programmers we can achieve things previously seen as impossible. Bouman had no background in astrophysics and worked with people with many different backgrounds to produce an image of something theoretically unseeable. This shows that in the field of technology, anything is possible if we work together as a team. We need to work with more people from different backgrounds to improve the lives of everyone around us. For example, doctors and programmers could work together next to develop a machine to perform the hardest of surgeries, programmers alone can’t do that. We need doctors to tell us what the machine should do, where to make an incision etc. She also taught us the great work women can do, not only in technology and software but also other STEM subjects. In order to get more women into technology we need to encourage more women into the field and then there will be more role models for women to look up to and thus more women in the industry. We need this because men and women think differently, studies have shown women tend to be more caring than men, thus looking out for the morals behind a service that we may introduce into society. Facebook, YouTube, Instagram, Netflix, Amazon, PaddyPower and other online services are all designed to keep the user entertained and active. They have many departments full of people who have studied behavioural sciences in order to understand how to get the platforms more addictive and I think, more women in senior management roles may have a more considerate and responsible motivation when achieving their career goals.

Dr. Katie Bouman not only made a massive contribution to the industry of computer science but also astrophysics. She helped prove the existence of blackholes which can now be used to make other major discoveries and maybe even predictions about the future. Her work in the field can never be forgotten and software engineers will hopefully be encouraged to work with other people in other fields to discover, invent and achieve more amazing things. While Bouman is still young I do hope many engineers (women in particular) are influenced by her work and her way of thinking. I know I have certainly been encouraged to consider the idea of getting people of different backgrounds into a team in the future even if they are not able to program yet.

[a] Local Cluster – A group of galaxies.
[1] - https://www.ted.com/talks/katie_bouman_how_to_take_a_picture_of_a_black_hole?language=en#t-25084

[2] - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Katie_Bouman

[3] - https://www.nationalgeographic.com/science/2019/04/first-picture-black-hole-revealed-m87-event-horizon-telescope-astrophysics/#:~:text=Orange%20on%20the%20moon,of%20just%20four%20million%20suns.

[4] - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Future_of_an_expanding_universe


